
THIS SITE IS RUNNING UNLICENSED
ASPDOTNETSTOREFRONT.COM

SOFTWARE! - Click

here

to activate your license."



GMT Games - Napoleon in Egypt










































Skip to content

GMT Games


 
Search











		Login
	



                    My Account
                




Cart (
                    0
                )



Menu

Home

Games


All Games
In Stock Games
Best Sellers - Current Year
Best Sellers - All Time
Gift Certificates
Registrations



P500 Pre-Order
Inside GMT Blog
GMT Merchandise

About Us


About Us
FAQs
Contact Us
Return Policy
Shipping
Privacy Policy













Games by Historical Period → Napoleonic Era (1792-1815) → Napoleon in Egypt





Categories

Browse by Series/Type

 Lunchtime Games (20-60 min. Strategy Games) 
18XX Games 
2016 Releases 
2017 Releases 
2018 Releases 
2019 Releases 
2020 Releases 
2021 Releases 
2022 Releases 
2023 Releases 
2024 Releases
Air Combat Games 
Ancient Civs Series 
Ancient World Series 
Battles of the American Revolution 
Best Sellers - All Time 
Best Sellers - Current Year 
Block Games 
C3i Special Publications Clearance 
Card Conquest Series 
Card-Driven Games 
Civil War Heritage Series 
Clash of Giants Series 
COIN Series 
Combat Commander 
Commands & Colors: Ancients 
Commands & Colors: Medieval 
Commands & Colors: Napoleonics 
Dark Valley WWII Series 
Deluxe Maps 
Digital Editions 
Down in Flames 
Downtown Air Series 
East Front Series 
Euro/Strategy Games 
Fast Action Battles (FAB) Series 
Fields of Fire Series 
Fighting Formations 
First Nations Solo Series 
Flying Colors 
Frank Chadwick's ETO Series 
Gameplayers' Series 
Games by Historical Period 
Gift Certificates 
Glory Series 
Great Battles of History 
Great Battles of the American Civil War 
Great Statesmen Series 
Irregular Conflicts Series 
Levy & Campaign Ancients
Levy & Campaign Series 
MBT Series 
Men of Iron Series 
Musket & Pike Series 
Napoleonic Wars Series 
Next War Series 
No Retreat Series 
Operational Series 
Panzer Series 
Registrations 
Rifle and Spade Series 
Sci-Fi Games 
Seven Years War Battle Series 
Simonitch 1940s Wargames 
Solitaire Games 
SpaceCorp 
Sports-Themed Games 
Tank Duel Series 
The Balloon Goes Up!
The Last Hundred Yards Series 
Thunder Alley Racing Series
Twilight Struggle Games
Wing Leader Series 
Non-Series Games 
Parts: Card Decks 
Parts: Miscellaneous 
Parts: Mounted Maps 



Browse Departments

Devir
Forever Out of Stock Legacy Games
Kuro Neko
Ludifolie Editions
In Stock Games
Out-of-Stock Reprint-Eligible Games
P500
SPECIALS
Consim Press
Hexasim
Stratagem
UGG
Vae Victis - Cérigo
Registrations



Browse Designers

Alan M. Newman 
Alan R. Moon 
Alex Knight 
Allen Dickerson 
Ananda Gupta 
Andrew Laws 
Andrew Ruhnke 
Ben Hull 
Ben Knight 
Bill Crenshaw 
Bob Kalinowski 
Brad Johnson 
Brad Stock 
Brendan Clark 
Brian Asklev 
Brian Stock 
Brian Train 
Bruce Harper 
Bruce Mansfield 
Bruno Sinigaglio 
Bryan Collars 
Carl Paradis 
Carla Horger 
Carlos Diaz Narvaez 
Carlos Márquez Linares 
Chad Jensen 
Charles Vasey 
Chris Fawcett 
Chris Janiec 
Christian Leonhard 
Christophe Pont 
Christopher Vorder Bruegge 
Colin Parsons 
Craig Besinque 
Dan Fournie 
Dan Holte 
Dan Verssen 
Daniel Burt 
Dave Powell 
Dave Townsend 
David Dockter 
David Fox 
David James Ritchie 
David Thompson 
Dick Whitaker 
Dirk Blennemann 
Dominick Duhamel 
Don Greenwood 
Don Hanle 
Douglas Bush 
Ed Beach 
Ed Ostermeyer 
Edgar Fenollar 
Evan Jones 
Fernando Sola Ramos 
Francisco Gradaille 
Frank Chadwick 
Fred Serval 
Gene Billingsley 
Geoff Engelstein 
Geoffrey Phipps 
Gilbert Collins 
Gina Willis 
Greg Holton 
Greg Laubach 
Gregory M. Smith 
Harold Buchanan 
Helmut Ohley 
Hermann Luttmann 
Jason Carr 
Jason Matthews 
Jason Walonoski 
Javier Romero 
Jeff Grossman 
Jeff Horger 
Jerry Shiles 
Jerry White 
Jesse Evans 
Jim Day 
Jim Krohn 
Jim Werbaneth 
Joe Dewhurst 
Joe Schmidt 
Joel Toppen 
John Butterfield 
John Firer 
John Foley 
John Harres 
John Poniske 
Joseph Chacon 
Jules Félisaz 
Julio E. Nazario 
Justin Fassino 
Ken Kuhn 
Kenneth Tee 
Kevin Boylan 
Kevin Krooks 
Kevin McPartland 
Kurt Keckley 
Lee Brimmicombe-Wood 
Leonhard Orgler 
Marc Rodrigue 
Mark Aasted 
Mark Herman 
Mark McLaughlin 
Mark Miklos 
Mark Mokszycki 
Mark Simonitch 
Mark Yoshikawa 
Matt Calkins 
Matthias Cramer 
Maurice Suckling 
Michael Carter 
Michael Gustavsson 
Michael Resch 
Michael Welker 
Mike Bertucelli 
Mike Denson 
Mike Hutton 
Mike Nagel 
Mitchell Land 
Morgane Gouyon-Rety 
Nick Neylon 
Non-Breaking Space 
P.R. Daniels 
Pascal Toupy 
Paul Hellyer 
Perry Silverman 
Petr Mojžíš 
Phil C. Fry 
Ralph Shelton 
Reiner Knizia 
Richard Borg 
Richard H. Berg 
Rick Young 
Sal Vasta 
Sam London 
Scott Muldoon 
Stephen A. Cuyler 
Stephen R. Welch 
Stephen Rangazas 
Stuka Joe 
Ted Raicer 
Ted Torgerson 
Terry Simo 
Tom Lehmann 
Tom Toupy-Durant 
Tony Fryer 
Trevor Bender 
Vance von Borries 
Volko Ruhnke 
VPJ Arponen 
William Terdoslavich 
Wray Ferrell 
Yann de Villeneuve 



Online Resources

Living-Rules
Multi-Lingual Living-Rules
Aide-de-Camp modules

Live Demos
Inside GMT
GMT Games Event
Online Links
Secure Shopping





Napoleon in Egypt








View Larger Image


                        Status:  Not there yet

                        Orders To Date:  409

                    Weight:  5.0000



Regular Price: $89.00P500 Price: $62.00 


 



Quantity
 

					Add to Cart
				












Banner designs by Luke Billingsley
SneakPeeks 
Note: Unless otherwise noted, all samples below are from playtest graphics, not final game art. GMT Games claims no copyright on these images.

ONLINE RESOURCES

BGG Page for Napoleon in Egypt
Video Example of Play of the Campaign Game from Developer Marco Poutré

Part 1 (29 Minutes)



INSIDEGMT ARTICLES

Battle of the Pyramids: Napoleon in Egypt – Full Turn Example of Play (Part 1), by Marco Poutré
Fleeing Down the Nile: Napoleon in Egypt – Full Turn Example of Play (Part 2), by Marco Poutré
A Mediterranean Diversion: Napoleon in Egypt – Full Turn Example of Play (Part 3), by Marco Poutré
Cloak-and-dagger Operations: Napoleon in Egypt – Full Turn Example of Play (Part 4), by Marco Poutré
Wonders of the Land of One Thousand and One Nights: Napoleon in Egypt – Full Turn Example of Play (Part 5), by Marco Poutré
A Short Story of the French Campaign in Egypt, Part 1 – The Conquest), by Pascal Toupy
A Short Story of the French Campaign in Egypt, Part 2 – The Syrian Anabasis, by Pascal Toupy
A Short Story of the French Campaign in Egypt, Part 3 – The Fall, by Pascal Toupy
Napoleon in Egypt: Dramatis Personae, Part 1, by Pascal Toupy and Tom Toupy-Durant
Napoleon in Egypt: Dramatis Personae, Part 2, by Pascal Toupy and Tom Toupy-Durant


NEWS

Interview from El Wargamero Novato with Co-Designer Pascal Toupy

English
Spanish

Interview from The Players' Aid with Co-Designer Pascal Toupy




Description
“Think of it, soldiers; from the summit of these pyramids, forty centuries look down upon you.”
– Napoleon Bonaparte
 
On July 1st, 1798, 35,000 French soldiers landed in Alexandria. This expeditionary force’s mission was many-fold: to find an alternative spice route through a foreseen Suez Canal, to settle yet another score with the British, to enlighten the population with ideals stemming from the recent French Revolution, and to discover what marvels and riches this fabled land of the 1001 Nights might hold. This was indeed an expedition where scientists walked alongside soldiers. Leading the French troops was also a young and ambitious general named Napoleon Bonaparte…


Napoleon in Egypt is a two-player, card-driven, operational wargame that allows you to recreate the French campaign in Egypt and Syria, from the landing of the French troops to the surrender of General Menou on August 31st, 1801. The game draws inspiration from other top-selling CDGs like Here I Stand and Twilight Struggle. A good and fast-playing introductory wargame thanks to its tight ruleset with few exceptions, the game will also please the veteran wargamers with 100 cards dripping with flavor, challenging players with the hand management every CDG fan has come to love!

Napoleon in Egypt comes with four scenarios:

The Conquest – Where the French surprise the Mamluks and sweep across Egypt (2 hours).
    
The Syrian Anabasis – Where the French offensive starts to lose steam as it has to face multiple fronts (2 hours).
    
The Fall – Where the French, weary from the fighting, adopt a defensive posture to face strong retaliation from the Mamluks, the Ottomans, and the British (2 hours).
    
The Campaign – Where players relive the highs and lows of the French expedition, from its landing to its bitter capitulation (5-6 hours).

Highlights:

Battle system featuring custom dice which represent the Combat Quality of each Unit involved, leading to a fast combat resolution without having to compute DRMs or refer to charts.
    
Events capturing the many pivotal moments of the campaign: the naval battle of Aboukir, the discovery of the Rosetta Stone, Napoleon’s untimely decision to return to France, etc.
    
Fortified Spaces’ populations side with one faction or the other as they trade one occupying force for another.
    
Espionage actions include the assassination of generals, ambushes, and sway of public order.
    
Tracks to measure the progress of the scientific side of the expedition, with perks helping the French Player on the field.


In Napoleon in Egypt, a French Player will square off against an Allied Player, controlling the loose Mamluk/Ottoman/British coalition. At the early onset of the campaign, the French will appear unstoppable as everything is in their favor: number and quality of troops, element of surprise, better leadership, etc. The French Regulars, however strong they are in Combat, are a finite number. The French have to tend to their wounded, convince the local population they are better off under French occupation, and dedicate some time and effort to the scientific mission of the expedition.


As the turns go by, the Allied Player gains the upper hand, being able to recruit locally, master the Mediterranean with help from the British Navy, and exploit General Menou’s incompetence once Napoleon leaves Egypt. The Allied Player has their own challenges though. Ottoman Generals can Command Mamluk Units but not the other way around, which makes it hard to muster a sizable force to strike back at the French. And even strength in numbers is not always enough. As Napoleon has proven time and again, no matter what the odds are, he can pull off a miracle on the battlefield!


The map is point-to-point, ranging from Alexandria to Thebes and Damascus on the continent, as well as Malta and Cyprus in the Mediterranean. Difficult and Inhospitable Spaces represent the harsh desert and other hindrances to army movement. Sea Spaces allow for naval action (Combat and transport of Units).


The Game Map (Prototype Artwork)
 
The cards, in typical CDG fashion, can be played either for their APs or their Event. The French Player will trigger the Events from the Allied cards they play from their hand and vice-versa, leading to tense hand management. Fortunately, a track called La Patrie en Danger serves as a “safety valve,” much like Twilight Struggle’s Space Race. Each faction also has access to a Home Card, usable once per Turn and providing a range of powerful options.
 

Sample of Cards (Prototype Artwork)
 
There are 4 types of custom dice in Napoleon in Egypt, each associated with a Combat Quality ranging from Elite to Mediocre. Each die type contains blank faces (Misses), targets (Hits), or Squares (which can be treated as Hits if a relevant Reaction Event has been played). Players roll the dice granted by their Units and total their number of Hits. Of course, Reaction Events allow for nasty surprises at the cost of a hand reduction, so nothing is ever guaranteed.



French Regulars use the Elite Combat Die while Militia Units use the Mediocre Combat Die (Prototype Artwork)
 

Solitaire Play Enabled by the CDG Solo System: Experience Bonaparte's excursion to Egypt solitaire with the cinematic play of the CDG Solo System! Napoleon in Egypt is compatible with the CDG Solo System and will come with an original playsheet from the game’s designer, edited by Ken Kuhn (one of the System’s co-designers). The included playsheet describes how the rules of the game are adapted to work with the CDG Solo System to support solitaire play. The CDG Solo System itself is not included with Napoleon in Egypt, but it can be purchased or downloaded as a free Print & Play Kit on the System’s home page here.



If you’ve always had a hard time getting 6 players together for a game of Here I Stand or Virgin Queen but crave such immersive card-driven wargames, do not miss Napoleon in Egypt. Come witness how Bonaparte proved his worth as a general before his ascension to the head of the French nation!

 
Components:

One 22”x34” mounted game board
    
100 poker-sized playing cards
    
2 Home Cards
    
30 custom Combat Dice (10 blue “Elite,” 5 red “Drilled,” 10 green “Average,” and 5 yellow “Mediocre”)
    
Two six-sided dice
    
15 black Espionage cubes
    
20 Leader standees
    
2 full-color countersheets
    
Two double-sided player aid sheets
    
One CDG Solo System playsheet
    
One rulebook
    
One playbook
    


Number of Players: 2





Game Designers: Pascal Toupy (Great War Commander) and his son Tom Toupy-Durant (PhD student in History with a focus on French Revolution)
Game Developer: Marco Poutré
 














Customer Reviews (0.00)   # of Ratings: 0    (Only registered customers can rate)





 





Main Navigation

Shop Our Games
Pre Order Games




Our Company


About Us
Contact Us
Sign up for our Mailing List



Order Information

Track Your Order
Returns/Policies
Shipping Information




Facebook
Twitter

Instagram

Board Game Geek

© GMT Games 1990 - 



























