

The Meiji Restoration and Modernization | Asia for Educators | Columbia University










The Meiji Restoration and Modernization






In 1868 the Tokugawa shôgun ("great general"), who
              ruled Japan in the feudal period, lost his power and the emperor was
              restored to the supreme position. The emperor took the name Meiji ("enlightened
              rule") as his reign name; this event was known as the Meiji
              Restoration.
The Reign of the Meiji Emperor
When the Meiji emperor was restored
              as head of Japan in 1868, the nation was a militarily weak country,
              was primarily agricultural, and had little technological development.
              It was controlled by hundreds of semi-independent feudal lords. The
              Western powers — Europe and the United States — had forced Japan
              to sign treaties that limited its control over its own foreign trade
              and required that crimes concerning foreigners in Japan be tried not
              in Japanese but in Western courts. When the Meiji period ended, with
              the death of the emperor in 1912, Japan had


· a highly centralized, bureaucratic government;
                  · a constitution establishing an elected parliament;
                  · a well-developed transport and communication system;
                  · a highly educated population free of feudal class restrictions;
                  · an established and rapidly growing industrial sector based
                  on the latest technology; and
                  · a powerful army and navy.


Japan had regained complete control of its foreign trade and legal
              system, and, by fighting and winning two wars (one of them against
              a major European power, Russia), it had established full independence
              and equality in international affairs. In a little more than a generation,
              Japan had exceeded its goals, and in the process had changed its whole
              society. Japan's success in modernization has created great interest
              in why and how it was able to adopt Western political, social, and
              economic institutions in so short a time.
One answer is found in the Meiji Restoration itself. This political
              revolution "restored" the emperor to power, but he did not
              rule directly. He was expected to accept the advice of the group that
              had overthrown the shôgun, and it was from this group that a
              small number of ambitious, able, and patriotic young men from the lower
              ranks of the samurai emerged to take control and establish the new
              political system. At first, their only strength was that the emperor
              accepted their advice and several powerful feudal domains provided
              military support. They moved quickly, however, to build their own military
              and economic control. By July 1869 the feudal lords had been requested
              to give up their domains, and in 1871 these domains were abolished
              and transformed into prefectures of a unified central state.
The feudal lords and the samurai class were offered a yearly stipend,
              which was later changed to a one-time payment in government bonds.
              The samurai lost their class privileges, when the government declared
              all classes to be equal. By 1876 the government banned the wearing
              of the samurai's swords; the former samurai cut off their top knots
              in favor of Western-style haircuts and took up jobs in business and
              the professions.
The armies of each domain were disbanded, and a national army based
              on universal conscription was created in 1872, requiring three years'
              military service from all men, samurai and commoner alike. A national
              land tax system was established that required payment in money instead
              of rice, which allowed the government to stabilize the national budget.
              This gave the government money to spend to build up the strength of
              the nation.
Resistance and Rebellion Defeated
Although these changes were made
              in the name of the emperor and national defense, the loss of privileges
              brought some resentment and rebellion. When the top leadership left
              to travel in Europe and the United States to study Western ways in
              1872, conservative groups argued that Japan should reply to Korean's
              refusal to revise a centuries old treaty with an invasion. This would
              help patriotic samurai to regain their importance. But the new leaders
              quickly returned from Europe and reestablished their control, arguing
              that Japan should concentrate on its own modernization and not engage
              in such foreign adventures.
For the next twenty years, in the 1870s and 1880s, the top priority
              remained domestic reform aimed at changing Japan's social and economic
              institutions along the lines of the model provided by the powerful
              Western nations. The final blow to conservative samurai came in the
              1877 Satsuma rebellion, when the government's newly drafted army, trained
              in European infantry techniques and armed with modern Western guns,
              defeated the last resistance of the traditional samurai warriors. With
              the exception of these few samurai outbreaks, Japan's domestic transformation
              proceeded with remarkable speed, energy, and the cooperation of the
              people. This phenomenon is one of the major characteristics of Japan's
              modern history.
Ideology
In an effort to unite the Japanese nation in response to
              the Western challenge, the Meiji leaders created a civic ideology centered
              around the emperor. Although the emperor wielded no political power,
              he had long been viewed as a symbol of Japanese culture and historical
              continuity. He was the head of the Shintô religion, Japan's native
              religion. Among other beliefs, Shintô holds that the emperor
              is descended from the sun goddess and the gods who created Japan and
              therefore is semidivine. Westerners of that time knew him primarily
              as a ceremonial figure. The Meiji reformers brought the emperor and
              Shintô to national prominence, replacing Buddhism as the national
              religion, for political and ideological reasons. By associating Shintô with
              the imperial line, which reached back into legendary times, Japan had
              not only the oldest ruling house in the world, but a powerful symbol
              of age-old national unity.
The people seldom saw the emperor, yet they were to carry out his
              orders without question, in honor to him and to the unity of the Japanese
              people, which he represented. In fact, the emperor did not rule. It
              was his "advisers," the small group of men who exercised
              political control, that devised and carried out the reform program
              in the name of the emperor.
Social and Economic Changes
The abolition of feudalism made possible
              tremendous social and political changes. Millions of people were suddenly
              free to choose their occupation and move about without restrictions.
              By providing a new environment of political and financial security,
              the government made possible investment in new industries and technologies.
The government led the way in this, building railway and shipping
              lines, telegraph and telephone systems, three shipyards, ten mines,
              five munitions works, and fifty-three consumer industries (making sugar,
              glass, textiles, cement, chemicals, and other important products).
              This was very expensive, however, and strained government finances,
              so in 1880 the government decided to sell most of these industries
              to private investors, thereafter encouraging such activity through
              subsidies and other incentives. Some of the samurai and merchants who
              built these industries established major corporate conglomerates called
              zaibatsu, which controlled much of Japan's modern industrial sector.
The government also introduced a national educational system and a
              constitution, creating an elected parliament called the Diet. They
              did this to provide a good environment for national growth, win the
              respect of the Westerners, and build support for the modern state.
              In the Tokugawa period, popular education had spread rapidly, and in
              1872 the government established a national system to educate the entire
              population. By the end of the Meiji period, almost everyone attended
              the free public schools for at least six years. The government closely
              controlled the schools, making sure that in addition to skills like
              mathematics and reading, all students studied "moral training," which
              stressed the importance of their duty to the emperor, the country and
              their families.
The 1889 constitution was "given" to the people by the emperor,
              and only he (or his advisers) could change it. A parliament was elected
              beginning in 1890, but only the wealthiest one percent of the population
              could vote in elections. In 1925 this was changed to allow all men
              (but not yet women) to vote.
To win the recognition of the Western powers and convince them to
              change the unequal treaties the Japanese had been forced to sign in
              the 1850s, Japan changed its entire legal system, adopting a new criminal
              and civil code modeled after those of France and Germany. The Western
              nations finally agreed to revise the treaties in 1894, acknowledging
              Japan as an equal in principle, although not in international power.
The
              International Climate: Colonialism and Expansion
In 1894 Japan fought
              a war against China over its interest in Korea, which China claimed
              as a vassal state. The Korean peninsula is the closest part of Asia
              to Japan, less than 100 miles by sea, and the Japanese were worried
              that the Russians might gain control of that weak nation. Japan won
              the war and gained control over Korea and gained Taiwan as a colony.
              Japan's sudden, decisive victory over China surprised the world and
              worried some European powers.
At this time the European nations were beginning to claim special
              rights in China — the French, with their colony in Indochina (today's
              Vietnam, Laos, and Cambodia), were involved in South China; the British
              also claimed special rights in South China, near Hong Kong, and later
              the whole Yangtze valley; and the Russians, who were building a railway
              through Siberia and Manchuria, were interested in North China. After
              Japan's victory over China, Japan signed a treaty with China which
              gave Japan special rights on China's Liaotung peninsula, in addition
              to the control of Taiwan. But Japan's victory was short lived. Within
              a week, France, Russia, and Germany combined to pressure Japan to give
              up rights on the Liaotung peninsula. Each of these nations then began
              to force China to give it ports, naval bases, and special economic
              rights, with Russia taking the same Liaotung peninsula that Japan had
              been forced to return.
The Japanese government was angered by this incident and drew the
              lesson that for Japan to maintain its independence and receive equal
              treatment in international affairs, it was necessary to strengthen
              its military even further. By 1904, when the Russians were again threatening
              to establish control over Korea, Japan was much stronger. It declared
              war on Russia and, using all its strength, won victory in 1905 (beginning
              with a surprise naval attack on Port Arthur, which gained for Japan
              the control of the China Sea). Japan thus achieved dominance over Korea
              and established itself a colonial power in East Asia.
The Period 1912-1941
The Meiji reforms brought great changes both
              within Japan and in Japan's place in world affairs. Japan strengthened
              itself enough to remain a sovereign nation in the face of Western colonizing
              powers and indeed became a colonizing power itself. During the Taishô period
              (1912-1926), Japanese citizens began to ask for more voice in the government
              and for more social freedoms. During this time, Japanese society and
              the Japanese political system were significantly more open than they
              were either before or after. The period has often been called the period
              of "Taishô democracy." One explanation is that, until
              World War I, Japan enjoyed record breaking economic prosperity. The
              Japanese people had more money to spend, more leisure, and better education,
              supplemented by the development of mass media. Increasingly they lived
              in cities where they came into contact with influences from abroad
              and where the traditional authority of the extended family was less
              influential. Industrialization in itself undermined traditional values,
              emphasizing instead efficiency, independence, materialism, and individualism.
              During these years Japan saw the emergence of a "mass society" very
              similar to the "Roaring 20s" in the United States. During
              these years also, the Japanese people began to demand universal manhood
              suffrage which they won in 1925. Political parties increased their
              influence, becoming powerful enough to appoint their own prime ministers
              between 1918 and 1931.
At the end of World War I, however, Japan entered a severe economic
              depression. The bright, optimistic atmosphere of the Taishô period
              gradually disappeared. Political party government was marred by corruption.
              The government and military, consequently, grew stronger, the parliament
              weaker. The advanced industrial sector became increasingly controlled
              by a few giant businesses, the zaibatsu. Moreover, Japan's international
              relations were disrupted by trade tensions and by growing international
              disapproval of Japan's activities in China. But success in competing
              with the European powers in East Asia strengthened the idea that Japan
              could, and should, further expand its influence on the Asian mainland
              by military force.
Japan's need for natural resources and the repeated rebuffs from the
              West to Japan's attempts to expand its power in Asia paved the way
              for militarists to rise to power. Insecurity in international relations
              allowed a right-wing militaristic faction to control first foreign,
              then domestic, policy. With the military greatly influencing the government,
              Japan began an aggressive military campaign throughout Asia, and then,
              in 1941, bombed Pearl Harbor.
Summary
The most important feature of the Meiji period was Japan's
              struggle for recognition of its considerable achievement and for equality
              with Western nations. Japan was highly successful in organizing an
              industrial, capitalist state on Western models. But when Japan also
              began to apply the lessons it learned from European imperialism, the
              West reacted negatively. In a sense Japan's chief handicap was that
              it entered into the Western dominated world order at a late stage.
              Colonialism and the racist ideology that accompanied it, were too entrenched
              in Western countries to allow an "upstart," nonwhite nation
              to enter the race for natural resources and markets as an equal. Many
              of the misunderstandings between the West and Japan stemmed from Japan's
              sense of alienation from the West, which seemed to use a different
              standard in dealing with European nations than it did with a rising
          Asian power like Japan.






Discussion Questions

What were some of the political, economic and social changes
                that occurred during the Meiji Period? 


What personage was at the
    center of Japan's new civic ideology? Why was using this personage
    as a symbol of national unity effective? 


What role did the central government
    play in growing industry? Providing education? 


How did colonization affect Asia
    in the late 1890's? What was the West's response to Japan's colonization efforts?    


The terms "modernization" and "Westernization" are
    often used interchangeably. What do these terms mean to you? Why
    do you think they often mean the same thing? 


Why is the period 1912-1945 sometimes
    referred to as the "Taishô democracy"? 


How would you describe
                  the political situation in Japan at the end of World War I? 


| back to top |






© Asia for Educators,
              Columbia University | http://afe.easia.columbia.edu 






