Artillery of the Napoleonic Wars: A Concise Dictionary, 1792–1815 - Kevin F. Kiley - كتب Googleبحث صور خرائط Google Play YouTube الأخبار Gmail Drive المزيد »تسجيل الدخولكتبمكتبتيمساعدةبحث متقدم في الكتبالحصول على الكتاب المطبوعلا تتوفر أي كتب إلكترونية.Casemate Publishersالبحث في مكتبةكافة البائعين »تسوّق لشراء الكتب على Google Playيمكنك تصفح أكبر متجر للكتب الإلكترونية في العالم وبدء القراءة اليوم على الويب أو الجهاز اللوحي أو الهاتف أو القارئ الإلكتروني.الانتقال إلى Google Play الآن »Artillery of the Napoleonic Wars: A Concise Dictionary, 1792–1815Kevin F. KileyFrontline Books, ١٥‏/٠٣‏/٢٠٢١ - 630 من الصفحاتA comprehensive military history reference book exploring all aspects of the artillery used during the Napoleonic Wars.Napoleon began his military career as an artillery cadet and artillery played a fundamental part in all his great battles. Until the Napoleonic Wars artillery had been seen merely as a supporting arm to the infantry, but Napoleon changed everything. He massed his guns in huge batteries to blast holes in his opponent’s line. He even used the artillery to charge the enemy, the gunners galloping up to the enemy to open fire at pointblank range.Napoleon’s opponents did not all follow suit, choosing other tactical deployments. As a result, the Napoleonic era, more than any that preceded or followed it, was one of fascinating artillery maneuvers and critical actions that changed the course of many of the key battles. As the Prussian Field Marshal Blucher once observed, “Against Napoleon you needed guns – and lots of them!”The Napoleonic Wars was also a time of innovation, with the introduction of shrapnel shells and military rockets. This book will examine the artillery arms of all sides from ‘muzzle to butt plate’. As well as the significant artillerymen of the period, the scientists, and innovators, military and civilian—individuals such as Robins, Belidor, Gribeauval and his colleagues, Maritz, Liechtenstein and his collaborators, as well as the du Teil brothers – will all be examined, as will the important battles and sieges, significant memoirs and documents, and artillery terms that soon became part of the military lexicon.Written by the renowned historian Kevin F. Kiley, this will be the definitive book on the subject and will cover all aspects of artillery in the Napoleonic Wars.“This is a wonderfully complete induction into the details of Napoleonic Artillery. As well as defining some of the archaic terms associated with the art of gunnery (note; point blank is not what we mostly believe it to be) it provides background to the careers of the key characters in the science. The book contains many excellent technical drawings to explain, sketches and images to inform and data tables in the appendix to which to refer. Overall, it is an indispensable aid to understanding the artillery of the period.” —Michael McCarthy, battlefield guide  معاينة هذا الكتاب » الصفحات المحددةجدول المحتوياتفهرسالمراجعالمحتوىIllustrations 1782 Artillery of the Napoleonic Wars A Concise Dictionary 17921815  Recommended Reading List  حقوق النشر طبعات أخرى - عرض جميع المقتطفاتArtillery of the Napoleonic Wars: A Concise Dictionary, 1792-1815<span dir=ltr>Kevin F. Kiley</span>‏لا تتوفر معاينة - 2021Artillery of the Napoleonic Wars: Field Artillery, 1792-1815<span dir=ltr>Kevin F. Kiley</span>‏لا تتوفر معاينة - 2015عبارات ومصطلحات مألوفة6-pounder ammunition Armée d'Italie Armée du Rhin army artillery and engineer artillery batteries artillery chief artillery officer artillery pieces Artillery Regiment artillery school artillery system artillery train artillerymen assigned attached Austrian artillery balls battalion battle bore breech British caissons calibre campaign canister cannon cartridge cast chef de bataillon colonel combat commander constructed Corps designed developed elevation emplaced employed engineer arm field artillery field pieces fire fortifications fortress France French artillery arm garrison Grande Armée Gribeauval System Guard artillery gun carriage gun companies gun crew gun tube gunners handspikes horse artillery companies howitzers infantry iron IV Corps Liechtenstein lieutenant limber manoeuvre metal military mortars muzzle Napoleon naval artillery ordnance organization parc period pontonniers pontoon powder promoted to captain promoted to chef Régiment d'Artillerie rockets round round shot Royal Artillery Russian artillery sapeurs screw Senarmont served Seven Years War shot siege sight Spain staff transom troops trunnions Vallière vent wheelsنبذة عن المؤلف (2021)Kevin F. Kiley is a retired US Marine Corps artillery officer. He is a graduate of West Point and has a Masters Degree in Military History from Norwich University. Kevin is a Fellow of both The Massena Society and also the International Napoleonic Society. He lives in North Carolina with his wife, Daisy, and his son, Michael.معلومات المراجعالعنوانArtillery of the Napoleonic Wars: A Concise Dictionary, 1792–1815المؤلفKevin F. KileyالناشرFrontline Books, 2021رقم ISBN (الرقم الدولي المعياري للكتاب)1848329555, 9781848329553عدد الصفحات630 من الصفحات  تصدير الاقتباسBiBTeX EndNote RefManمعلومات حول كتب Google - سياسة الخصوصية - بنود الخدمة - معلومات للناشرين - الإبلاغ عن مشكلة - مساعدة - صفحة ‏Google الرئيسية
