NAPOLEON IN EXILE - Barry Edward O'Meara - كتب Googleبحث صور خرائط Google Play YouTube الأخبار Gmail Drive المزيد »تسجيل الدخولكتبمكتبتيمساعدةبحث متقدم في الكتبالتنزيل بتنسيق EPUBالتنزيل بتنسيق PDFقراءة الكتاب الإلكترونيNAPOLEON IN EXILE, المجلد 2Barry Edward O'MearaW. Simpkin and R. Marshall, 1822 - 542 من الصفحات  معاينة هذا الكتاب » الصفحات المحددةالصفحةالصفحةالصفحةصفحة العنوانفهرسطبعات أخرى - عرض جميع المقتطفاتNapoleon in Exile, Or, A Voice from St. Helena: The Opinions and ..., المجلد 2<span dir=ltr>Barry Edward O&#39;Meara</span>‏عرض كامل - 1823NAPOLEON IN EXILE, المجلد 2<span dir=ltr>Barry Edward O&#39;Meara</span>‏عرض كامل - 1822Napoleon in Exile: Or, A Voice from St. Helena. The Opinions and ..., المجلد 2<span dir=ltr>Barry Edward O&#39;Meara</span>‏عرض كامل - 1885عرض جميع المقتطفات »عبارات ومصطلحات مألوفةadded admiral afterwards allowed ambassador amongst appeared army arrival asked assassination asserted Austria bassadors Bourbons canaille caused Cipriani Colonel command communication complaints continued Napoleon conversation Count Bertrand Count Montholon death declared desired dysentery emperor endeavoured England English Europe favour France French give given Gourgaud governor Helena homme honour hundred India informed island king ladies land laughed letter Longwood Lord Amherst Lord Bathurst Lord Castlereagh Lord Liverpool Madame Major Gorrequer manner ment ministers Montholon Moreau Murat Naples Napo Napoleon Bonaparte nation neral never obliged observed officer opinion person Pichegru Plantation House present Prince prisoners Queen Caroline received refused regiment replied restrictions Russia Saliceti sent shew ships Sir Hudson Lowe Sir Thomas Reade surgeon Suzzarelli tain taken Talleyrand thing thought throne tion told town troops vessel wanted wishمقاطع مشهورةالصفحة 452 - I HEREBY solemnly protest in the face of God and of men, against the violation of my most sacred rights, in forcibly disposing of my person and my liberty. I came voluntarily on board of the Bellerophon. I am not the prisoner, but the guest of England.‏تظهر في 60 من الكتب من 1822-2006الصفحة 453 - I appeal to history; it will say that an enemy, who for twenty years waged war against the English people, came voluntarily in his misfortunes to seek an asylum under their laws. What more brilliant proof could he give of his esteem and his confidence? But what return did England make for so much magnanimity? A hospitable hand‏تظهر في 43 من الكتب من 1822-2005المزيدالصفحة 452 - only intended to lay a snare for me, it has forfeited its honour, and disgraced its flag. If this act be consummated, the English will in vain boast to Europe of their integrity, their laws, and their liberty. British good faith will be lost in the hospitality of the‏تظهر في 35 من الكتب من 1815-2006الصفحة 451 - that Napoleon Bonaparte is placed out of the pale of civil and social relations; and that as an enemy and a disturber of the world, he is delivered up to public vengeance!‏تظهر في 89 من الكتب من 1815-2005الصفحة 461 - j'aie pu recevoir ni vous donner aucune nouvelle, sans que vous ayez communiqué avec qui que ce soit, Français ou Anglais; privé même d'un domestique de votre choix. Votre conduite à Sainte-Hélène a été, comme votre vie, honorable et sans reproche; j'aime à vous le dire. Votre lettre à votre amie de Londres n'avait rien‏تظهر في 14 من الكتب من 1818-1981الصفحة 261 - been properly supported, he would have destroyed the whole of the French ships. " He could not only have destroyed them," replied Napoleon, " but he might and would have taken them out, had your admiral supported him as he ought to have done. For, in consequence of the signal made by L'Allemand,‏تظهر في 17 من الكتب من 1822-2002الصفحة 19 - I was the most ignorant of the three in military affairs. These two sovereigns, especially the King of Prussia, were completely au fait, as to the number of buttons there ought to be in front of a jacket, how many behind, and the manner in which the skirts ought to be cut. Not a tailor‏تظهر في 11 من الكتب من 1822-2005الصفحة 76 - Waterloo had closed my career of arms for ever. My own opinion is, that I ought to have died at Waterloo; perhaps a little earlier. Had I died at Moscow, I should probably have had the reputation of the greatest conqueror ever known. But the smiles of fortune were at an end.‏تظهر في 11 من الكتب من 1822-2005الصفحة 39 - cannot prevent it. Russia and Austria can at any time effect it. Once mistress of Constantinople, Russia gets all the commerce of the Mediterranean, becomes a great naval power, and God knows what may happen. She quarrels with you, marches off to India an army of seventy thousand good soldiers, which to .Russia is nothing, and a hundred thousand canaille,‏تظهر في 16 من الكتب من 1822-2005الصفحة 62 - destroy four or five thousand men in such a direction, it was done in a moment; but leave him to himself he was an imbecile without judgment. I cannot conceive how so brave a man could be so Idche. He was no where brave unless before the enemy.‏تظهر في 12 من الكتب من 1822-1950أقلمعلومات المراجعالعنوانNAPOLEON IN EXILE, المجلد 2NAPOLEON IN EXILE, Barry Edward O'Mearaالمجلد 2 من Napoleon in Exile: Or, A Voice from St. Helena : the Opinions and Reflections of Napoleon on the Most Important Events of His Life and Government in His Own Words, Barry Edward O'MearaالمؤلفBarry Edward O'Mearaالإصدار4الناشرW. Simpkin and R. Marshall, 1822عدد الصفحات542 من الصفحات  تصدير الاقتباسBiBTeX EndNote RefManمعلومات حول كتب Google - سياسة الخصوصية - بنود الخدمة - معلومات للناشرين - الإبلاغ عن مشكلة - مساعدة - صفحة ‏Google الرئيسية
