The Last Days of the Emperor Napoleon, - Francesco Antommarchi - كتب Googleبحث صور خرائط Google Play YouTube الأخبار Gmail Drive المزيد »تسجيل الدخولكتبمكتبتيمساعدةبحث متقدم في الكتبالتنزيل بتنسيق EPUBالتنزيل بتنسيق PDFقراءة الكتاب الإلكترونيThe Last Days of the Emperor Napoleon,Francesco AntommarchiHenry Colburn, 1825  معاينة هذا الكتاب » الصفحات المحددةصفحة العنوانفهرسطبعات أخرى - عرض جميع المقتطفاتThe Last Days of the Emperor Napoleon,<span dir=ltr>Francesco Antommarchi</span>‏لا تتوفر معاينة - 2010عبارات ومصطلحات مألوفةAbbé affairs Ajaccio Apostolical Prefect appeared arms army asked attacked Austrians bath battle Bertrand better Bonaparte Buonavita calash circumstances Cisalpine Republic climate complained continued Corsica costiveness cough disorder Doctor effect Egypt emollient Emperor Emperor had passed Emperor's health endeavoured enemas enemy epidermis Europe excellent extremely favourable feel felt France gave Genoa glory head-ach heard Helena hepatitis honour hypochondriac region island Italy kind La Favorite labouring laughed liniment liver Longwood Lord Bathurst Madame Mère Majesty Mascagni medicines ment mind Montholon morning Muiron Napoleon never night o'clock obliged pain patient physician produced pulse received recollect remained render Republic respecting right hypochondriac Rome sent Sir Hudson Sire soldiers soon spoke strength sufferings taken thing thought tion told took troops turn Tuscany Tyrol victory Vignali violent whilst wish woundedمقاطع مشهورةالصفحة 143 - Je passais jusqu'aux lieux où l'on garde mon fils. Puisqu'une fois le jour vous souffrez que je voie Le seul bien qui me reste et d'Hector et de Troie , J'allais , seigneur , pleurer un moment avec lui : Je ne l'ai point encore embrassé d'aujourd'hui ! PYRRHUS.‏تظهر في 180 من الكتب من 1786-2006الصفحة 369 - The bed has become a place of luxury to me! I would not exchange it for all the thrones in the world.‏تظهر في 33 من الكتب من 1825-2008المزيدالصفحة 337 - Let it alone — leave it the liberty of defending itself — it will do better than your drugs. Our body is a watch, that is intended to go for a given time. The watchmaker cannot open it; and must, on handling it, grope his way blindfolded and at random.‏تظهر في 32 من الكتب من 1825-2006الصفحة 374 - He was skilful, vigilant, daring; little re" garding fatigue, and death still less : he would " have gone to the end of the world in search " of victory. I had, besides, chosen for him " lieutenants worthy of him. Belliard : was " equally qualified for the cabinet and the field : " he directed the irrigations, encouraged culti...‏تظهر في 4 من الكتب من 1825-1835الصفحة 369 - ... lethargic stupor, and must make an effort even to raise my eyelids. I sometimes dictated upon different subjects to four or five secretaries, who wrote as fast as words could be uttered ; but then I was Napoleon. Now I am no longer anything. My strength, my faculties forsake me. I do not live ; I merely exist.‏تظهر في 20 من الكتب من 1825-2006الصفحة 89 - ... detail of the habits I have acquired, of the affections to which I am subject. " The hours at which I obey the injunctions of nature are in general extremely irregular. I sleep, I eat according to circumstances or the situation in which I am placed ; my sleep is ordinarily sound and tranquil. If pain or any accident interrupt it I jump out of bed, call for a light, walk, set to work, and fix my attention on some subject ; sometimes I remain in the dark, change my apartment, lie down in another...‏تظهر في 7 من الكتب من 1825-2004الصفحة 337 - I already told you, a machine made to live. We are organized for that purpose, and such is our nature. Do not counteract the living principle. Let it alone — leave it the liberty of defending itself — it will do better than your drugs.‏تظهر في 27 من الكتب من 1825-2006الصفحة 171 -  It was a Turkish corps which guarded our Lady of Loretto, and who were cantoned in the church ; thus I had not much difficulty in ranging the Italians on my side. I said to them...‏تظهر في 7 من الكتب من 1822-1855الصفحة 101 - Soon after the arrival of the priests Napoleon determined, we may suppose partly in jest, to elevate one of them to the dignity of bishop, and he chose for a diocese the Jumna. "The last box brought from Europe had been broken open," says Antommarchi; "it contained the vases and church ornaments. "Stop," said Napoleon, "this is the property of St.‏تظهر في 9 من الكتب من 1825-2004أقلمعلومات المراجعالعنوانThe Last Days of the Emperor Napoleon,المجلد 1 من The Last Days of the Emperor Napoleon, Francesco AntommarchiالمؤلفFrancesco AntommarchiالناشرHenry Colburn, 1825أصلي منجامعة هارفاردالكتب ذات التنسيق الرقمي29 آذار (مارس) 2007  تصدير الاقتباسBiBTeX EndNote RefManمعلومات حول كتب Google - سياسة الخصوصية - بنود الخدمة - معلومات للناشرين - الإبلاغ عن مشكلة - مساعدة - صفحة ‏Google الرئيسية
