Sir Hudson Lowe And Napoleon (1898) - Robert Cooper Seaton - كتب Googleبحث صور خرائط Google Play YouTube الأخبار Gmail Drive المزيد »تسجيل الدخولكتبمكتبتيمساعدةبحث متقدم في الكتبتسوّق لشراء الكتب على Google Playيمكنك تصفح أكبر متجر للكتب الإلكترونية في العالم وبدء القراءة اليوم على الويب أو الجهاز اللوحي أو الهاتف أو القارئ الإلكتروني.الانتقال إلى Google Play الآن »Sir Hudson Lowe And Napoleon (1898)Robert Cooper SeatonKessinger Publishing, 2009 - 248 من الصفحاتSir Hudson Lowe and Napoleon is a historical account written by Robert Cooper Seaton in 1898. The book is a detailed analysis of the relationship between Sir Hudson Lowe, the governor of St. Helena, and Napoleon Bonaparte, the exiled French emperor who was imprisoned on the island. Seaton provides a comprehensive overview of the events that led to Napoleon's exile and imprisonment, and the subsequent interactions between him and Lowe.The book explores the complex dynamics between the two men, who had vastly different personalities and backgrounds. Lowe, a strict and disciplined military man, was tasked with the responsibility of overseeing Napoleon's captivity, while the emperor, a brilliant strategist and charismatic leader, was determined to maintain his dignity and assert his authority despite his confinement.Seaton draws from a wide range of sources, including letters, diaries, and official documents, to provide a detailed and nuanced account of the interactions between Lowe and Napoleon. He also delves into the political and social context of the time, exploring the wider implications of Napoleon's exile and the impact it had on European history.Overall, Sir Hudson Lowe and Napoleon is a fascinating and insightful book that sheds light on a little-known aspect of Napoleon's life and legacy. It is a must-read for anyone interested in history, politics, or military strategy.This scarce antiquarian book is a facsimile reprint of the old original and may contain some imperfections such as library marks and notations. Because we believe this work is culturally important, we have made it available as part of our commitment for protecting, preserving, and promoting the world's literature in affordable, high quality, modern editions, that are true to their original work. طبعات أخرى - عرض جميع المقتطفاتSir Hudson Lowe and Napoleon<span dir=ltr>Robert Cooper Seaton</span>‏عرض كامل - 1898Sir Hudson Lowe and Napoleon<span dir=ltr>R. C. 1853-1915 Seaton</span>‏لا تتوفر معاينة - 2016Sir Hudson Lowe and Napoleon<span dir=ltr>Robert Cooper Seaton</span>‏لا تتوفر معاينة - 2016عرض جميع المقتطفات »معلومات المراجعالعنوانSir Hudson Lowe And Napoleon (1898)المؤلفRobert Cooper Seatonالإصدارمعاد طباعتهالناشرKessinger Publishing, 2009رقم ISBN (الرقم الدولي المعياري للكتاب)1104305399, 9781104305390عدد الصفحات248 من الصفحات  تصدير الاقتباسBiBTeX EndNote RefManمعلومات حول كتب Google - سياسة الخصوصية - بنود الخدمة - معلومات للناشرين - الإبلاغ عن مشكلة - مساعدة - صفحة ‏Google الرئيسية
